# Introduction

Finding the ground state properties of a trapped hard sphere Bose-gas can be a difficult task to do analytically, but has great relevancy in investigating gases of alkali atoms, as stated by DuBois and Glyde [@DuBoisGlyde2001]. As such, we shall implement a variational Monte Carlo solver specialized for the problem at hand, and solve it numerically. This is done in Rust, a fast, safe and modern compiled language.

We will investigate a simple boson gas situated in an elliptical harmonic potential well. This is done by employing the variational principle (as explained by Griffiths [@Griffiths]) to find the optimal wave function and corresponding energy. We consider both the case of non-interacting particles, described by their single particle Gaussian wave function, and also expand this model to interacting systems by introducing the Jastrow function for pairwise interaction. Using the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm paired with Monte Carlo integration, we calculate the expected local energy of the system and use steepest gradient descent to find the minimum of this energy with regards to the variational parameter $\alpha$.

In this report, we will first introduce the theory behind our approach and find an analytical solution for a simplified system. This is done to have a benchmark to which we can compare the performance of our numerical solver. Thereafter we present the methodology behind our solver and how its implemented. The results it produces and comparisons are shown in section {@sec:results} and further discussed in section {@sec:discussion}.
